Okay.
So I am super excited to introduce you to the next section of the course.
This will be the first of several sections focusing on the new composition API in Vue three.
So let's talk a little bit about where we've been and where we're going.
So the syntax that we've used so far throughout the course with every component that we've built is
called the Options API.
And that was the standard way to build components in Vue three.
So when I say Options API, I mean having that configuration object with properties like data, like
methods like computed, etc., that is an example of using Options API.
And that was the way that all components worked in Vue too.
Now keep in mind the Options API is still available in Vue 3.0 and it doesn't appear to be going anywhere
anytime soon.
So you shouldn't think that the options API is the old way of doing things or the deprecated way of
doing things.
It isn't.
It's just one option that's available to you.
And with Vue 3.0, the development team introduced an alternative way, another way to build components
called the Composition API that they believe solves some of the problems that the Options API has.
That doesn't mean that the composition API is always guaranteed to be better.
It doesn't mean that you're going to enjoy it more.
So what I recommend you do is actually treat these two as two tools in your toolbox, right?
Options API is more of the older way of doing things.
And composition API is the newer way of doing things.
But if you want to be a well-rounded Vue developer, you should know both of these options, especially
if you're going to jump into a code base that's been in development for a long time.
You're probably going to find both of these options around.
So it's important to understand the syntax and how it works.
All right.
So we're going to learn a lot about Composition API in this section.
Let's talk about the problems that it's trying to solve that exist in the Options API that by now we're
very familiar with.
So the first issue is that code that belongs together logically, and by that I mean code that kind
of belongs to the same feature even within a single view component is many times split across multiple
parts of the view component configuration object.
So even if we think about data methods and and computed properties, we have that logic scattered across
these three different parts of the configuration object.
Now, throughout the course, we've tried our best to build really small reusable components.
But when you go into the real world and you explore a real world code base, you're going to find a
lot of violations of best practices.
So it's common to find components that are going to be 100 lines long or 500 lines long.
And in those components, you may have a very large collection of data properties like ten or more.
You might have ten or more methods.
You might have ten or more computed properties.
And of course, computed properties derive and depend on data and methods often update data.
So there is kind of this relationship between them.
They need to be knowledgeable about each other.
And whenever you have this large component and you have three separate sections and even more, because
there's additional ways that we can set up the configuration object, such as props, as a reminder,
whenever you have those features and their logic scattered across different parts of that set up object,
in many times of the scroll up and down, you have to understand the logic of execution.
This method calls this method which updates this data property, which affects this computed property,
and it becomes kind of hard to isolate the responsibilities of the component and to place them.
And there are lines of code closer to each other simply because the design of the configuration object
forces them into these separate categories like data and computed, right?
So in larger components, it actually makes it kind of difficult to understand what is going on.
This may not be an issue that we see apparently in our code right now, but rest assured, you can you
can sort of see it or imagine it happening as a components grow really large in size.
Another issue is that it becomes difficult to reuse logic, especially reactive logic across components,
right?
So we can define data and we can define computed properties that depend on it, but that requires a
configuration object belonging to a component.
So the problem was we had really no way of extracting that logic, so it lived simply outside of a component.
Now, if you had a solution called mixed ends in version two, but that was generally considered an
anti pattern.
So I'm not going to introduce it.
But as we've hopefully seen or as you've hopefully seen in the previous section, when we explore reactivity
by using Vue three helper functions, we saw that now we had some of that reactive functionality outside
of any given component.
I'm talking about functions like ref and reactive and computed and too RAF.
Right.
We saw that we could use those functions outside of any component and that is kind of the solution that
the composition API is trying to move towards to enable you to reuse logic across components.
The idea is with the.
Composition API.
We write functions which are also called composable, composable that use views, react to features.
So these functions are going to use the functions that we introduced in the previous section like rough
and reactive.
And the beautiful part about that is we can write these reusable functions outside of a component.
They can stored their own idea of data, their own idea of computation, and then we can reuse them
across multiple components.
And as another benefit, we can test these functions outside of a component as well, because they're
going to be playing JavaScript functions.
Right.
So the whole idea, very similar to kind of the principles that we've been talking about when we introduced
Vue X is we're always trying to make components dumber.
We always want components to handle just the display logic, just a view.
But inevitably we need some place to calculate the business logic to do some kind of computation right
or analysis.
Well, in view X, we kind of moved a lot of that logic up to basic JavaScript functions that compose
dark getters or mutations or actions.
And it's sort of a similar design principle here in that we're trying to move a lot of this logic away
from a component in a separate files where we can test them independently and then reuse them across
multiple components so that the components focus as much as they can on just the view.
I'm just the template.
All right, so the basic gist of how the composition API works when it comes to components is in our
script section, in the component configuration object, we're now going to try to bundle all component
logic up in a single setup method.
So if we're going to use the composition API, we no longer need things like data computed or methods.
We're going to bundle everything up within a single setup method and I'll show you how to do that in
the upcoming lessons.
And so that allows a lot of related lines of code to live next to each other that solve the issue that
we saw a couple of slides ago.
And then because the set up method is able to use those composable reactive JavaScript functions, we
also solved the problem of reusability.
So the composition API helps us solve both of the issues.
We saw a couple of slides ago, that reusable aspect and the organization of logic aspect by placing
related code closer together in a single set method.
Now here's a really good piece of news.
The core HTML template syntax like vue directives like v for v.
If the von handler, you know the app sign all those shortcuts, none of that has changed.
That syntax actually remains exactly the same.
Just about all of the changes are going to be in the script section of the component where we set up
things like the data that the component needs in order to operate.
So most of it is going to be on the JavaScript side of things below the actual HTML template.
So other Vue object properties like props or components are not going to change either.
Only how we set up the initial logic for the component.
And that's going to include obviously not just things like data and computed, which we've already mentioned,
but also things like lifecycle hooks like mounted, right?
Also things like talking to the The View Store, using the dollar sign store property that we had previously,
which we're no longer going to have in the setup method or things like the dollar sign, root or object,
which we're no longer going to have either.
So there's a lot of different concepts we've explored in the script section, and the new idea with
the composition API is there's a whole new way to write those ideas within a single setup method.
But the good news is the HTML side of things doesn't change that much, if at all.
All right.
So with that, that is a quick introduction to the composition API and the set up method.
In the very next lesson, we're going to start actually exploring this in this code.
And the way we're going to do so is by refactoring an old component and switching it from being the
app options API to the composition API.
Later on, we're going to move towards a design principle where we're going to try to convert basically
all of our components to the composition API, not necessarily because it's always better to do so,
but because we've had plenty of practice with the Options API already.
And I want to give you a ton of practice with the composition API as well, both refactoring components,
which is a common thing.
If you join a view to project that, you need to put it to V3.
But also we're going to practice writing new features in from scratch using this new composition API
as well.
So there's still a ton left to learn.
I'm looking forward to it.
This is kind of the latest and greatest version of view.
This is all the latest functionality in Vue three.
This is the big thing that it added the composition API which exists alongside the older options API,
a whole different new way to write your view components.
And we're going to start exploring it in our editor in the very next lesson.